---
id: "learn: docker"
aliases: []
tags:
  - learn
  - docker
---

2026-04-20 Init 21:59

## what is it
``Docker`` is an open-source container runtime platform that enables developers to build, ship, and run applications within isolated, lightweight packages called containers. It solves the common "it works on my machine" problem by bundling an application together with all its necessary dependencies, libraries, and configurations into a single unit that runs consistently across any environment.

## how it works
Docker create deamon process that runs on the host machine and manages the lifecycle of containers. Developers define their application and its dependencies in a Dockerfile, which is a text file that contains instructions for building a Docker image. The image is a read-only template that can be used to create multiple containers.

When a container is started from an image, it runs in an isolated environment with its own filesystem, network interfaces, and process space. This isolation allows multiple containers to run on the same host without interfering with each other. Docker also provides tools for managing and orchestrating containers, making it easier to deploy and scale applications in production environments.

Docker also has docker compose, which is a tool for defining and running multi-container Docker applications. With Docker Compose, you can use a YAML file to configure your application's services, networks, environment variable and volumes, and then use a single command to create and start all the services defined in the file.

## example
Example of Dockerfile use in Terminal_shelf project:
```dockerfile
# 1. Dependencies Stage
FROM node:22-alpine AS deps # define a stage named "deps" to install dependencies, node:22-alpine is a lightweight Node.js image based on Alpine Linux and recomended for newer Next.js projects / Prism 7
WORKDIR /app # Set working directory to /app
COPY package.json package-lock.json* ./ # Copy package.json and package-lock.json to the working directory
RUN npm ci # Run npm ci to install dependencies based on package-lock.json, which ensures a clean and reproducible installation

# 2. Builder Stage
FROM node:22-alpine AS builder # define a stage named "builder" to build the application
WORKDIR /app
COPY --from=deps /app/node_modules ./node_modules # Copy the node_modules from the "deps" stage to the current stage
COPY . . # Copy the rest of the application code to the working directory
# Important: Generate Prisma Client for the build
RUN npx prisma generate
RUN npm run build # Build the Next.js application, which compiles the source code and prepares it for production

# 3. Runner Stage (The tiny, production-ready image)
FROM node:22-alpine AS runner
WORKDIR /app
ENV NODE_ENV=production # Set the NODE_ENV environment variable to "production" to optimize the application for production use

# Create the cache directory and set permissions BEFORE switching user
# chown or changing ownership of files and directories is necessary to ensure that the non-root user (in this case, "node") has the appropriate permissions to read/write files during runtime. If the cache directory is created after switching to the non-root user, it may be owned by root and cause permission issues when the application tries to access it.
RUN mkdir -p .next/cache && chown -R node:node .next 

# Use --chown=node:node to ensure the app user can read/write the files
COPY --from=builder --chown=node:node /app/public ./public
COPY --from=builder --chown=node:node /app/.next/standalone ./
COPY --from=builder --chown=node:node /app/.next/static ./.next/static
COPY --from=builder --chown=node:node /app/src/generated/prisma ./src/generated/prisma

# use the EXPOSE instruction to specify that the container listens on port 3000 at runtime, which is the default port for Next.js applications
EXPOSE 3000

# Switch to the non-root user "node" for better security, which is a built-in user in the node:22-alpine image
USER node
# command to start the application using Node.js, which runs the server.js file generated by the Next.js build process. This file is responsible for starting the Next.js server and serving the application on the specified port.
CMD ["node", "server.js"]
```

Example of dokcer-compose.yml use in Terminal_shelf project:
```yaml
services:
  web:
    build: .
    network_mode: "host"
    environment:
      - PORT=3000
      - HOSTNAME=0.0.0.0
      - AUTH_TRUST_HOST=true
    env_file:
      - .env
```

## gotchas
### The Ephemeral Nature of Containers
The biggest surprise for most newbies is that containers are ephemeral.
If save a file inside a container (like a generated report, an uploaded image, or a database record) and that container stops or is deleted, that data is gone forever.

  The Fix: Use Volumes. You must explicitly map a folder on your host machine to a folder inside the container. This "mounts" the data so it survives even when the container is destroyed.

### Networking: localhost Confusion
When we run two containers (e.g., a web app and a database) and they need to talk to each other, you might be tempted to use localhost inside your application configuration. Inside the container, localhost refers to the container itself, not your host machine or the other container.

  The Fix: Use the service name defined in your docker-compose.yml file as the hostname. Docker's internal DNS will automatically resolve the service name to the correct IP address.

### Running as Root
By default, processes inside containers often run as the root user. If an attacker manages to exploit a vulnerability in your application, they gain root-level access to the process environment. While the container isolates it from your host, it is still a significant security risk.

  The Fix: Define a non-privileged user in your Dockerfile using the USER instruction, and ensure your application runs as that user.

### The "Bloated Image" Problem
It is easy to create massive images by installing unnecessary dependencies or failing to clean up caches during the build process. Additionally, using the :latest tag for your images can lead to unpredictable deployments, where your app behaves differently because the "latest" version changed.

  The Fix: * Use multi-stage builds to keep final image small.

  Use specific version tags (e.g., python:3.12-slim instead of python:latest) to ensure your builds are reproducible.

### Disk space accumulation
Docker creates many "dangling" images, stopped containers, and unused volumes over time. It doesn't clean these up automatically, and you will eventually find yourself running out of disk space. For docker when we create image with the same name and tag, it will create a new image with the same name and tag but different image ID, which can lead to confusion and disk space issues.

  The Fix: Regularly run docker system prune to clean up unused images, containers, and volumes. Be cautious with this command as it will remove all unused data.

```bash
docker system prune -a
```

## links
